Type 2 Diabetes - NIDDK
Skip to main content
An official website of the United States government
Here’s how you know
Here’s how you know
Official government website icon
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
icon-https
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you’ve safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
Search
Menu
Search for Information from NIDDK
Entire Site
Research & Funding
Health Information
News
About NIDDK
Search
Home
Research & Funding
Expand Research & Funding
Current Funding Opportunities
Research Programs & Contacts
Human Subjects Research
Funding Process
Research Training & Career Development
Funded Grants & Grant History
Research Resources
Research at NIDDK
Technology Advancement & Transfer
Meetings & Workshops
Health Information
Expand Health Information
Health Topics
Diabetes
Digestive Diseases
Kidney Disease
Weight Management
Liver Disease
Urologic Diseases
Endocrine Diseases
Diet & Nutrition
Blood Diseases
Diagnostic Tests
La información de la salud en español
Health Statistics
Healthy Moments Radio Broadcast
Clinical Trials
For Health Professionals
Diabetes Discoveries & Practice Blog
Community Health & Outreach
News
Expand News
News Archive
For Reporters
Meetings & Workshops
Media Library
Follow Us
About NIDDK
Expand About NIDDK
Meet the Director
Offices & Divisions
Staff Directory
Budget & Legislative Information
Advisory & Coordinating Committees
Strategic Plans & Reports
Research Areas
FAQs
Jobs at NIDDK
Visit Us
Contact Us
NIDDK 75th Anniversary
Home
Health Information
Diabetes
Diabetes Overview
What Is Diabetes?
Type 2 Diabetes
Related Topics
English
English
Español
What Is Diabetes?
Type 1 Diabetes
Type 2 Diabetes
Insulin Resistance & Prediabetes
Gestational Diabetes
Show child pages
Definition & Facts
Symptoms & Causes
Tests & Diagnosis
Management & Treatment
Prevention
After Your Baby is Born
Monogenic Diabetes
Type 2 Diabetes
On this page:
What is type 2 diabetes?
Who is more likely to develop type 2 diabetes?
What are the symptoms of diabetes?
What causes type 2 diabetes?
How do health care professionals diagnose type 2 diabetes?
How can I manage my type 2 diabetes?
What medicines do I need to treat my type 2 diabetes?
What health problems can people with diabetes develop?
How can I lower my chances of developing type 2 diabetes?
What is type 2 diabetes?
Type 2 diabetes, the most common type of diabetes, is a disease that occurs when your blood glucose, also called blood sugar, is too high. Blood glucose is your main source of energy and comes mainly from the food you eat.
Insulin
, a
hormone
made by the
pancreas
, helps glucose get into your cells to be used for energy. In type 2 diabetes, your body doesn’t make enough insulin or doesn’t use insulin well. Too much glucose then stays in your blood, and not enough reaches your cells.
The good news is that you can take steps to prevent or delay the development of type 2 diabetes.
Who is more likely to develop type 2 diabetes?
You can develop type 2 diabetes at any age, even during childhood. However, type 2 diabetes occurs most often in middle-aged and older people. You are more likely to develop type 2 diabetes if you are age 45 or older, have a family history of diabetes, or are
overweight
or have
obesity
.  Diabetes is more common in people who are African American, Hispanic/Latino, American Indian, Asian American, or Pacific Islander.
Physical inactivity and certain health problems such as
high blood pressure
affect your chances of developing type 2 diabetes. You are also more likely to develop type 2 diabetes if you have
prediabetes
or had
gestational diabetes
when you were pregnant. Learn more about
risk factors for type 2 diabetes
.
Type 2 diabetes occurs most often in middle-aged and older people.
What are the symptoms of diabetes?
Symptoms of diabetes include
increased thirst and urination
increased hunger
feeling tired
blurred vision
numbness or tingling in the feet or hands
sores that do not heal
unexplained weight loss
Symptoms of type 2 diabetes often develop slowly—over the course of several years—and can be so mild that you might not even notice them. Many people have no symptoms. Some people do not find out they have the disease until they have diabetes-related health problems, such as blurred vision or
heart disease
.
What causes type 2 diabetes?
Type 2 diabetes is caused by several factors, including
overweight and obesity
not being physically active
insulin resistance
genes
Learn more about the
causes of type 2 diabetes
.
How do health care professionals diagnose type 2 diabetes?
Your health care professional can diagnose type 2 diabetes based on blood tests. Learn more about
blood tests for diabetes
and what the results mean.
How can I manage my type 2 diabetes?
Managing your blood glucose,
blood pressure
, and
cholesterol
, and quitting smoking if you smoke, are important ways to
manage your type 2 diabetes
. Lifestyle changes that include planning healthy meals, limiting calories if you are overweight, and being physically active are also part of managing your diabetes. So is taking any prescribed medicines. Work with your health care team to create a diabetes care plan that works for you.
Following your meal plan helps you manage your diabetes.
What medicines do I need to treat my type 2 diabetes?
Along with following your diabetes care plan, you may need diabetes medicines, which may include pills or medicines you inject under your skin, such as insulin. Over time, you may need more than one diabetes medicine to manage your blood glucose. Even if you don’t take insulin, you may need it at special times, such as during pregnancy or if you are in the hospital. You also may need medicines for high blood pressure, high cholesterol, or other conditions.
Learn more about
medicines, insulin, and other diabetes treatments
.
What health problems can people with diabetes develop?
Following a good diabetes care plan can help protect against many diabetes-related health problems. However, if not managed, diabetes can lead to problems such as
heart disease and
stroke
nerve damage
kidney disease
foot problems
eye disease
gum disease and other dental problems
sexual and bladder problems
Many people with type 2 diabetes also have
nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD)
. Losing weight if you are overweight or have obesity can improve NAFLD. Diabetes is also linked to other health problems such as
sleep apnea
, depression, some types of cancer, and
dementia
.
You can take steps to lower your chances of developing these
diabetes-related health problems
.
How can I lower my chances of developing type 2 diabetes?
Research such as the
Diabetes Prevention Program
, sponsored by the National Institutes of Health, has shown that you can take steps to reduce your chances of developing type 2 diabetes if you have risk factors for the disease. Here are some things you can do to lower your risk:
Lose weight if you are overweight, and keep it off.
You may be able to prevent or delay diabetes by losing 5 to 7 percent of your current weight.
1
For instance, if you weigh 200 pounds, your goal would be to lose about 10 to 14 pounds.
Move more.
Get at least 30 minutes of physical activity, such as walking, at least 5 days a week. If you have not been active, talk with your health care professional about which activities are best. Start slowly and build up to your goal.
Eat healthy foods.
Eat smaller portions to reduce the amount of calories you eat each day and help you lose weight. Choosing foods with less fat is another way to reduce calories. Drink water instead of sweetened beverages.
Ask your health care team what other changes you can make to prevent or delay type 2 diabetes.
Most often, your best chance for preventing type 2 diabetes is to make lifestyle changes that work for you long term. Get started with
Your Game Plan to Prevent Type 2 Diabetes
.
References
[1] Diabetes Prevention Program Research Group. Long-term effects of lifestyle intervention or metformin on diabetes development and microvascular complications over 15-year follow-up: the Diabetes Prevention Program Outcomes Study.
The Lancet Diabetes & Endocrinology.
2015;3(11):866‒875. You can find more information about this study on the
Diabetes Prevention Program Outcomes Study website
.
Last Reviewed May 2017
Share
this page
Print
Facebook
X
Email
More Options
WhatsApp
LinkedIn
Reddit
Pinterest
Copy Link
This content is provided as a service of the
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases
(NIDDK), part of the National Institutes of Health. NIDDK translates and disseminates research findings to increase knowledge and understanding about health and disease among patients, health professionals, and the public. Content produced by NIDDK is carefully reviewed by NIDDK scientists and other experts.
The NIDDK would like to thank:
Rita Basu, M.D., Mayo Clinic
Contact Us
Hours:
8:30 a.m.
to
5 p.m.
ET, Monday - Friday
Email:
healthinfo@niddk.nih.gov
Phone:
+
1-800-860-8747
TTY:
+
711
@NIDDKgov
Chat
Live Chat Available
8:30 a.m. - 5 p.m. ET
Monday - Friday
Follow Us
LinkedIn
X
Facebook
YouTube
Instagram
NIH… Turning Discovery Into Health ®
Privacy Policy
Freedom of Information Act
Accessibility
Disclaimers
Copyright
Vulnerability Disclosure Policy
Site Map
For Staff Only
Get Email Updates
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
National Institutes of Health